# 2.2.1 The Formalism of Formal Grammars

Since formal languages are a branch of mathematics, work in this field is done in a
special notation. To show some of its flavor, we shall give the formal definition of
a grammar and then explain why it describes a grammar like the one in Figure 2.3.
The formalism used is indispensable for correctness proofs, etc., but not for understanding
the principles; it is shown here only to give an impression and, perhaps, to
bridge a gap.

Definition 2.1: A generative grammar is a 4-tuple (VN,VT ,R,S) such that
(1) VN and VT are finite sets of symbols,
(2) VN ∩VT = /0,
(3) R is a set of pairs (P,Q) such that
(3a) P ∈ (VN ∪VT )+ and
(3b) Q ∈ (VN ∪VT )∗,
(4) S ∈ VN

A 4-tuple is just an object consisting of 4 identifiable parts; they are the nonterminals,
the terminals, the rules and the start symbol, in that order. The above
definition does not tell this, so this is for the teacher to explain. The set of nonterminals
is named VN and the set of terminals VT . For our grammar we have:

VN = {Name, Sentence, List, End}
VT = {tom, dick, harry, ,, and}

(note the , in the set of terminal symbols).

The intersection of VN and VT (2) must be empty, indicated by the symbol for
the empty set, /0. So the non-terminals and the terminals may not have a symbol in
common, which is understandable.

R is the set of all rules (3), and P and Q are the left-hand sides and right-hand
sides, respectively. Each P must consist of sequences of one or more non-terminals
and terminals and each Q must consist of sequences of zero or more non-terminals
and terminals. For our grammar we have:

R = {(Name, tom), (Name, dick), (Name, harry),
(Sentence, Name), (Sentence, List End), (List, Name),
(List, List , Name), (, Name End, and Name)}

Note again the two different commas.

The start symbol S must be an element of VN, that is, it must be a non-terminal:

S = Sentence

This concludes our field trip into formal linguistics. In short, the mathematics of
formal languages is a language, a language that has to be learned; it allows very concise
expression of what and how but gives very little information on why. Consider
this book a translation and an exegesis.