# 6.7.1 Prolog

Prolog has its foundations in logic. The programmer declares some facts about objects and their relationships, and asks questions about these. The Prolog system uses a built-in search and backtracking mechanism to answer the questions. For example, we can tell the Prolog system about the fact that a table and a chair are pieces of furniture by writing

furniture(table). 
furniture(chair).

We can then ask if a bread is a piece of furniture:

| ?- furniture(bread).

and the answer will be “no”, but the answer to the question

| ?- furniture(table).

will be “yes”. Such a Prolog form that can succeed or fail is called a predicate and when it is used as the start of a search it is called a goal.

We can also use variables, which can be either instantiated (have a value), or uninstantiated; such variables are called logic variables. Logic variables are identified by names starting with a capital letter or an underscore (_). We can use them for example as follows:

| ?- furniture(X).

This is asking for an instantiation of the logic variable X. The Prolog system will search for a possible instantiation and respond:

X = table

We can then either stop by typing a RETURN, or continue searching by typing a semicolon (and then a RETURN). In the latter case the Prolog system will search for another instantiation of X. The process of finding instantiations of logic variables that match the known facts is called inference.

Not every fact is as simple as the one in the example above. For example, a Prolog clause that tells us something about antique furniture is the following:

antique_furniture(Obj,Age) :- furniture(Obj), Age > 100.

Here we see a predicate which is the conjunction of two goals: an object Obj with age Age is an antique piece of furniture if it is a piece of furniture and its age is more than 100 years.

An important data structure in Prolog is the list, in which a arbitrary number of data items are concatenated. The empty list is denoted by []; [a] is a list with head a and tail []; [a,b,c] is a list with head a and tail [b,c]. Another useful data structure is the compound value, in which a fixed number of data items are combined in a named entity. An example is dog(’Fido’,brown). Data items in data structures may be logic variables.