# 3.3.2 构建控制机制

构建一个解析器的控制机制是一件相当不同的事情。 Some controls are independent of the grammar, some consult the grammar regularly, some use large tables precomputed from the grammar and some even use tables computed from the input string. We shall see examples of each of these: the “hand control” that was demonstrated at the beginning of this section comes in the category “consults the grammar regularly”, backtracking parsers often use a grammar-independent control, LL and LR parsers use precomputed grammar-derived tables, the CYK parser uses a table derived from the input string and Earley’s and GLR parsers use several tables derived from the grammar and the input string.

Constructing the control mechanism, including the tables, from the grammar is almost always done by a program. Such a program is called a parser generator; it is fed the grammar and perhaps a description of the terminal symbols and produces a program which is a parser. The parser often consists of a driver and one or more tables, in which case it is called table-driven. The tables can be of considerable size and of extreme complexity.

The tables that derive from the input string must of course be computed by a routine that is part of the parser. It should be noted that this reflects the traditional setting in which a large number of different input strings is parsed according to a relatively static and unchanging grammar. The inverse situation is not at all unthinkable: many grammars are tried to explain a given input string, for example an observed sequence of events.