# 3.7.1 Parse Trees in the Producer-Consumer Model

In the producer-consumer model the parser is the producer and the program using the parse trees is the consumer. As in all producer-consumer situations in computer science, the immediate question is, which is the main program and which is the subroutine.

The most esthetically pleasing answer is to have them both as equal partners, which can be done using coroutines. Coroutines are explained in some books on principles of programming languages and programming techniques, for example Advanced Programming Language Design by R.A. Finkel (Addison-Wesley). There are also good explanations on the Internet.

In the coroutine model, the request for a new parse tree by the user and the offer of a parse tree by the parser are paired up automatically by the coroutine mechanism. The problem with coroutines is that they must be built into the programming language, and no major programming language features them. So coroutines are not a practical solution to parse tree representation.

The coroutine’s modern manifestation, the thread, in which the pairing up is done by the operating system or by a light-weight version of it inside the program, is available in some major languages, but introduces the notion of parallelism which is not inherently present in parsing. The UNIX pipe has similar communication properties but is even more alien to the parsing problem.

Usually the parser is the main program and the consumer is the subroutine. Each time the parser has finished constructing a parse tree, it calls the consumer routine with a pointer to the tree as a parameter. The consumer can then decide what to do with this tree: reject it, accept it, store it for future comparison, etc. In this setup the parser can just happily produce trees, but the consumer will probably have to save state data between being called, to be able to choose between parse trees. This is the usual setup in compiler design, where there is only one parse tree and the user state saving is less of a problem.

It is also possible to have the user as the main program, but this places a heavy burden on the parser, which is now forced to keep all state data of its half-finished parsing process when delivering a parse tree. Since data on the stack cannot be saved as state data (except by draconian means) this setup is feasible only with parsing methods that do not use a stack.

With any of these setups the user still has two problems in the general case. First, when the parser produces more than one parse tree the user receives them as separate trees and may have to do considerable comparison to find the differences on which to base further decisions. Second, if the grammar is infinitely ambiguous and the parser produces infinitely many parse trees, the process does not terminate.

So the producer-consumer model is satisfactory for unambiguous grammars, but is problematic for the general case.