# 3.5.1 方向性

Non-directional methods construct the parse tree while accessing the input in any order they see fit. This of course requires the entire input to be in memory before parsing can start. There is a top-down and a bottom-up version. Directional parsers access the input tokens one by one in order, all the while updating the partial parse tree(s). There is again a top-down and a bottom-up version.

### 3.5.1.1 Non-Directional Methods

The non-directional top-down method is simple and straightforward and has probably been invented independently by many people. To the best of our knowledge it was first described by Unger [12] in 1968, but in his article he gives the impression that the method already existed. The method has not received much attention in the literature but is more important than one might think, since it is used anonymously in a number of other parsers. We shall call it Unger’s method; it is described in Section 4.1.

The non-directional bottom-up method has also been discovered independently by a number of people, among whom Cocke (in Hays [3, Sect. 17.3.1]), Younger [10], and Kasami [13]; an earlier description is by Sakai [5]. It is named CYK (or sometimes CKY) after the three best-known inventors. It has received considerable attention since its naive implementation is much more efficient than that of Unger’s method. The efficiency of both methods can be improved, however, arriving at roughly the same performance; see Sheil [20]. The CYK method is described in Section 4.2.

Non-directional methods usually first construct a data structure which summarizes the grammatical structure of the input sentence. Parse trees can then be derived from this data structure in a second stage.

### 3.5.1.2 Directional Methods

The directional methods process the input symbol by symbol, from left to right. (It is also possible to parse from right to left, using a mirror image of the grammar; this is occasionally useful.) This has the advantage that parsing can start, and indeed progress, considerably before the last symbol of the input is seen. The directional methods are all based explicitly or implicitly on the parsing automaton described in Section 3.4.3, where the top-down method performs predictions and matches and the bottom-up method performs shifts and reduces.

Directional methods can usually construct the (partial) parse tree as they proceed through the input string, unless the grammar is ambiguous and some postprocessing may be required.