# 3.5.5 Deterministic Top-Down and Bottom-Up Methods

There is only one deterministic top-down method; it is called LL. The first L stands for Left-to-right, the second for “identifying the Leftmost production”, as directional top-down parsers do. LL parsing is treated in Chapter 8. LL parsing, especially LL(1) is very popular. LL(1) parsers are often generated by a parser generator but a simple variant can, with some effort, be written by hand, using  ecursive-descent techniques; see Section 8.2.6. Occasionally, the LL(1) method is used starting from the last token of the input backwards; it is then called RR(1).

There are quite a variety of deterministic bottom-up methods, the most powerful being called LR, where again the L stands for Left-to-right, and the R stands for “identifying the Rightmost production”. Linear bottom-up methods are treated in Chapter 9. Their parsers are invariably generated by a parser generator: the control mechanism of such a parser is so complicated that it is not humanly possible to construct it by hand. Some of the deterministic bottom-up methods are very popular and are perhaps used even more widely than the LL(1) method.

LR(1) parsing is more powerful than LL(1) parsing, but also more difficult to understand and less convenient. The other methods cannot be compared easily to the LL(1) method. See Chapter 17.1 for a comparison of practical parsing methods. The LR(1) method can also be applied backwards and is then called RL(1).

Both methods use look-ahead to determine which actions to take. Usually this look-ahead is restricted to one token (LL(1), LR(1), etc.) or a few tokens at most, but it is occasionally helpful to allow unbounded look-ahead. This requires different parsing techniques, which results in a subdivision of the class of deterministic parsers; see Figure 3.11.

The great difference in variety between top-down and bottom-up methods is easily understood when we look more closely at the choices the corresponding parsers face. A top-down parser has by nature little choice: if a terminal symbol is predicted, it has no choice and can only ascertain that a match is present; only if a non-terminal is predicted does it have a choice in the production of that non-terminal. A bottomup parser can always shift the next input symbol, even if a reduction is also possible (and it often has to do so). If, in addition, a reduction is possible, it may have a choice between a number of right-hand sides. In general it has more choice than a top-down parser and more powerful methods are needed to make it deterministic.