# 2.1.2 语法

Everyone who has studied a foreign language knows that a grammar is a book of
rules and examples which describes and teaches the language. Good grammars make
a careful distinction between the sentence/word level, which they often call syntax or
syntaxis and the word/letter level, which they call morphology. Syntax contains rules
like “pour que is followed by the subjunctive, but parce que is not”. Morphology
contains rules like “the plural of an English noun is formed by appending an -s,
except when the word ends in -s, -sh, -o, -ch or -x, in which case -es is appended, or
when the word has an irregular plural.”
We skip the computer scientist’s view of a grammar for the moment and proceed
immediately to that of the formal-linguist. His view is at the same time very abstract
and quite similar to the layman’s: a grammar is any exact, finite-size, complete
description of the language, i.e., of the set of sentences. This is in fact the school
grammar, with the fuzziness removed. Although it will be clear that this definition
has full generality, it turns out that it is too general, and therefore relatively powerless.
It includes descriptions like “the set of sentences that could have been written
by Chaucer”; platonically speaking this defines a set, but we have no way of creating
this set or testing whether a given sentence belongs to this language. This particular
example, with its “could have been” does not worry the formal-linguist, but there
are examples closer to his home that do. “The longest block of consecutive sevens
in the decimal expansion of π” describes a language that has at most one word in
it (and then that word will consist of sevens only), and as a definition it is exact, of
finite-size and complete. One bad thing with it, however, is that one cannot find this
word: suppose one finds a block of one hundred sevens after billions and billions of
digits, there is always a chance that further on there is an even longer block. And
another bad thing is that one cannot even know if this longest block exists at all. It
is quite possible that, as one proceeds further and further up the decimal expansion
of π, one would find longer and longer stretches of sevens, probably separated by
ever-increasing gaps. A comprehensive theory of the decimal expansion of π might
answer these questions, but no such theory exists.
For these and other reasons, the formal-linguists have abandoned their static, platonic
view of a grammar for a more constructive one, that of the generative grammar:
a generative grammar is an exact, fixed-size recipe for constructing the sentences in
the language. This means that, following the recipe, it must be possible to construct
each sentence of the language (in a finite number of actions) and no others. This does
not mean that, given a sentence, the recipe tells us how to construct that particular
sentence, only that it is possible to do so. Such recipes can have several forms, of
which some are more convenient than others.
The computer scientist essentially subscribes to the same view, often with the additional
requirement that the recipe should imply how a sentence can be constructed.