# 4.2.7 CYK的简短回顾

We have come a long way. We started with building a recognition table using the original grammar. Then we found that using the original grammar with its unit rules and ε-rules is somewhat complicated, although it can certainly be done. We proceeded by transforming the grammar to CNF. CNF does not contain unit rules or ε-rules. Our gain in this respect was that the algorithm for constructing the recognition table became much simpler. The limitation of the maximum length of a righthand side to 2 was a gain in efficiency, and also a little in simplicity. However, Sheil [20] has demonstrated that the efficiency only depends on the maximum number of non-terminals occurring in a right-hand side of the grammar, not on the length of the right-hand sides per sé. This can easily be understood, once one realizes that the efficiency depends on (among other things) the number of cuts in a substring that are “difficult” to find, when checking whether a right-hand side derives this substring. This number of “difficult” cuts only depends on the number of non-terminals in the right-hand side. So, for efficiency, Chomsky Normal Form is a bit too restrictive.

A disadvantage of this transformation to CNF is that the resulting recognition table lacks some information that we need to construct a derivation using the original grammar. In the transformation process, some non-terminals were thrown away, because they became non-productive. Fortunately, the missing information could easily be recovered. Ultimately, this process resulted in almost the same recognition table that we would get with our first attempt using the original grammar. It only contains some extra information on non-terminals that were added during the transformation of the grammar to CNF. More importantly, however, it was obtained in a simpler and much more efficient way.

For a more elaborate version of the CYK algorithm, applied to Tree Adjoining Grammars, see Section 15.4.2.