# 3.6 The “Strength” of a Parsing Technique

Formally a parsing technique T1 is stronger (more powerful) than a parsing technique T2 if T1 can handle all grammars T2 can handle but not the other way around. Informally one calls one parsing technique stronger than another if to the speaker it appears to handle a larger set of grammars. Formally this is of course nonsense, since all parsing techniques can handle infinite sets of grammars, and the notion of “larger” is moot. Also, a user grammar designed without explicit aim at a particular parsing technique has an almost zero chance of being amenable to any existing technique anyway. What counts from a user point of view is the effort required to modify the “average” practical grammar so it can be handled by method T, and to undo the damage this modification causes to the parse tree. The strength (power) of parsing technique T is inversely proportional to that effort.

Almost invariably a strong parser is more complicated and takes more effort to write than a weak one. But since a parser or parser generator (see Section 17.2) needs to be written only once and then can be used as often as needed, a strong parser saves effort in the long run.

Although the notion of a “strong” parser is intuitively clear, confusion can arise when it is applied to the combination of parser and grammar. The stronger the parser is, the fewer restrictions the grammars need to obey and the “weaker” they can afford to be. Usually methods are named after the grammar and it is here where the confusion starts. A “strong LL(1) grammar” is more restricted than an “LL(1) grammar”; one can also say that it is more strongly LL(1). The parser for such grammars is simpler than one for (full) LL(1) grammars, and is — can afford to be — weaker. So actually a strong-LL(1) parser is weaker than an LL(1) parser. We have tried to consistently use the hyphen between “strong” and “LL(1)” to show that “strong” applies to “LL(1)” and not to “parser”, but not all publications follow that convention, and the reader must be aware. The reverse occurs with “weak-precedence parsers” which are stronger than “precedence parsers” (although in that case there are other differences as well).