# 3.1.3 Linearization of the Parse Tree

Often it is inconvenient and unnecessary to construct the actual parse tree: a parser can produce a list of rule numbers instead, which means that it linearizes the parse tree. There are three main ways to linearize a tree, prefix, postfix and infix. In prefix notation, each node is listed by listing its number followed by prefix listings of the subnodes in left-to-right order; this gives us the leftmost derivation (for the right tree in Figure 3.2):

leftmost:2 2 1 3c 1 3e 1 3a

If a parse tree is constructed according to this scheme, it is constructed in pre-order. In postfix notation, each node is listed by listing in postfix notation all the subnodes in left-to-right order, followed by the number of the rule in the node itself; this gives us the rightmost derivation (for the same tree):

rightmost: 3c 1 3e 1 2 3a 1 2

This constructs the parse tree in post-order.In infix notation, each node is listed by first giving an infix listing between parentheses of the first n subnodes, followed by the rule number in the node, followed by an infix listing between parentheses of the remainder of the subnodes; n can be chosen freely and can even differ from rule to rule, but n = 1 is normal. Infix notation is not common for derivations, but is occasionally useful. The case with n = 1 is called the left-corner derivation; in our example we get:

left-corner: (((3c)1) 2 ((3e)1)) 2 ((3a)1)

The infix notation requires parentheses to enable us to reconstruct the production tree from it. The leftmost and rightmost derivations can do without them, provided we have the grammar ready to find the number of subnodes for each node.

It is easy to tell if a derivation is leftmost or rightmost: a leftmost derivation starts with a rule for the start symbol, while a rightmost derivation starts with a rule that produces terminal symbols only. (If both conditions hold, there is only one rule, which is both a leftmost and a rightmost derivation.)

The existence of several different derivations should not be confused with ambiguity. The different derivations are just notational variants for one and the same production tree. No semantic significance can be attached to their differences.