# 3.4.1 时间要求

当解析一个包含几个符号的字符串时，对于解析器的时间要求有些想法是很重要的，When parsing strings consisting of more than a few symbols, it is important to have some idea of the time requirements of the parser, i.e., the dependency of the time required to finish the parsing on the number of symbols in the input string. Expected lengths of input range from some tens (sentences in natural languages) to some tens of thousands (large computer programs); the length of some input strings may even be virtually infinite (the sequence of buttons pushed on a coffee vending machine over its life-time). The dependency of the time requirements on the input length is also called time complexity.

Several characteristic time dependencies can be recognized. A time dependency is exponential if each following input symbol multiplies the required time by a constant factor, say 2: each additional input symbol doubles the parsing time. Exponential time dependency is written O(Cn) where C is the constant multiplication factor. Exponential dependency occurs in the number of grains doubled on each field of the famous chess board; this way lies bankruptcy.

A time dependency is linear if each following input symbol takes a constant amount of time to process; doubling the input length doubles the processing time. This is the kind of behavior we like to see in a parser; the time needed for parsing is proportional to the time spent on reading the input. So-called real-time parsers behave even better: they can produce the parse tree within a constant time after the last input symbol was read; given a fast enough computer they can keep up indefinitely with an input stream of constant speed. Note that this is not necessarily true of linear-time parsers: they can in principle read the entire input of n symbols and then take a time proportional to n to produce the parse tree.

Linear time dependency is written O(n). A time dependency is called quadratic if the processing time is proportional to the square of the input length (written O(n2)) and cubic if it is proportional to the third power (written O(n3)). In general, a dependency that is proportional to any power of n is called polynomial (written O(np)).